TypeScript enables you to write better applications, that are more robust, easier to maintain and contain overall lower number of defects. Below is a list of benefits TypeScript provides.

- **Clean code.** By maintaining consistency of type and syntax, your code will end up being cleaner, easier to read and easier to understand. By having all types have a clear definition and usage, there will be less guess-work done while writing and reading the code.
- **Better maintenance.** By having your code-base easier to read and understand, maintenance becomes easy. When you need to make changes to the code-base, you have more confidence your changes will have the right effect and won’t generate additional defects.
- **Consistency.** By forcing you to pay attention to duplicate variable definitions, return types, required and optional function parameters, you end up having a more condensed and consistent code base.
- **Lower amount of defects.** The result of all of the above benefits ends up providing higher quality code and lower number of defects.
- **Compiled code is readable.** The code generated by TypeScript is readable and makes it easy to read and develop.
- **Good development experience.** IDE’s that support TypeScript provide a rich development-level error checking, allowing you to maximize your coding writing skills.
- **Granular level type checking.** You can configure TypeScript to type-check specific elements of your code, e.g. you can control if ‘null’ values are allowed, if you allow variables without initiazliations etc. More on this later in this course.